most of us think of the Sun as our
friend
it helps plants grow keeps us warm and
who doesn't love to lie on the beach on
a sunny day but for all of its good
qualities the Sun can also be harmful in
large amounts that's why we invented
sunscreen the purpose of sunscreen is to
shield the body from the sun's
ultraviolet rays which have several
harmful effects including sunburn aging
and skin cancer promotion these rays are
separated by their different wavelengths
into types such as UVA and UVB which
exert a variety of effects in the skin
due to the absorption patterns of
chromophores the parts of the molecules
responsible for their color the primary
two chromophores are hemoglobin found in
our red blood cells and melanin which
gives our skin its pigment we know that
UVB rays cause the skin to burn the role
of UVA rays is less well understood and
appears to have an effect on our tanning
response carcinogenesis and aging so how
does the sunscreen protect us from these
rays there are two basic types of
sunscreen physical and chemical blockers
physical blockers like zinc oxide or
titanium dioxide reflect sun rays by
acting as a physical barrier if you've
seen lifeguards with noses covered in
white then you know what this looks like
the same ingredients are primary
components of diaper creams where the
goal is also to create a physical
barrier historically they haven't always
been easy to apply and were
conspicuously visible on the skin but
new formulations have made this less of
an issue chemical blockers on the other
hand absorb the sun's rays they
deteriorate more quickly than physical
sunscreens because their ability to
absorb the Sun diminishes generally
these are more transparent when rubbed
on the skin but some people develop
allergic reactions to some of the
chemicals regardless of the type of
sunscreen all are subjected to testing
to determine their sunburn Protection
factor or SPF this is essentially a
measure of the protection that the
sunscreen will provide from UVB rays
before one begins to burn but even if
you don't burn you still need to use
sunscreen because unless you live in a
cave you're not immune to the effects of
the Sun it is true that darker skin
people and those who can easily have
more built
in protection from sunburns but they are
still vulnerable to the effects of UVA
children under the age of six months on
the other hand should have almost no sun
exposure as their protective mechanisms
are not fully functioning and their skin
is more likely to absorb any sunscreen
that is applied wearing sunscreen helps
protect against the development of all
three types of skin cancer basal cell
carcinoma squamous cell carcinoma and
melanoma on a daily basis the DNA in
your cells is developing mutations and
errors that are generally handled by
machinery within your cells but
ultraviolet rays from the Sun lead to
mutations that the cell may not be able
to overcome leading to uncontrolled
growth and eventual skin cancer the
scariest thing about this is that
usually you can't even see it happening
until it's too late
but if these concrete risks to your
health are not enough to convince you to
use sunscreen there are aesthetic
reasons as well along with cigarette
smoking sun damage is the leading cause
of premature aging photoaging from
chronic sun exposure leads to a loss of
elasticity in the skin in other words
making it look saggy take a look at this
truck driver whose left side was
chronically exposed to the Sun and
noticed the difference this is an
important point car windows block UVB
the burn rays but not UVA the aging rays
it is recommended to use sunscreen daily
but you should pay special attention
before prolonged sun exposure or when at
the beach or amongst know since the
reflectivity of water and ice amplifies
the sun's rays for these cases apply
about an ounce 15 to 30 minutes before
you go out and once again soon after you
get outside after that you should
reapply it every two to three hours
especially after swimming or sweating
otherwise you should wear protective
clothing with ultraviolet protection
factor or UPF stay in shaded areas such
as under trees or an umbrella and avoid
the Sun at the peak hours of 10 a.m. to
4 p.m. and what's the best kind of
sunscreen everyone will have their
preference but look for the following
things broad-spectrum SPF of at least 30
and water-resistant a light moisturizer
with SPF 30 should be good for daily you
take note if you decide to use a spray
they take several coats to effectively
cover your skin like painting a wall
with a spray can versus a paintbrush so
enjoy the Sun but enjoy it with
sunscreen